WHY I CREATED TXT2HTML

David Mertz
mertz@gnosis.cx
Tue 05-16-2000


THE ITCH TO SCRATCH
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The idea for this still-little project started out as a few
  lines of single-purpose script.  I started writing articles for
  a publisher who uses a particular HTML template for articles.
  It is nice enough looking, and not too cumbersome.
  Nonetheless, I really like writing in a plain text editor,
  without bothering with spending keystrokes on tags that you
  might mistype... and especially without writing in a
  word-processor or "WYSINWYG" HTML editor.  Nothing between me
  and the words, as god intended (don't get me started on the
  missing function keys to the left of my keyboard...  I am just
  full of theological convictions).

  Yes I know about macros in various editors.  Yes I know about
  folding away the markup, and syntax-highlighting it to focus on
  the actual text.  And I even hear that editors can help make
  sure that tags get spelled correctly, are auto-completed, and
  so on.  But it is all ways of partially making up for what was
  lost in the introduction of the markup.

  In terms of markup, it seems like email and Usenet conventions
  have it right.  An ASCII *boldface* here and there, an
  _Underlined_ book title every once in a while.  These things
  are unobtrusive to type, and look good without depending on
  proprietary formats that cannot be read without special tools,
  and plain ASCII remains easy to process with programming tools.
  A few minor conventions about capitalization and spacing added
  to the mix are enough to represent quite a bit of semantic
  variation without appearing unnatural to, say, 'less'.  So
  that's how I started writing my articles.


HOW IT GREW OUT OF CONTROL
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  A few lines of Python were enough to transform my basic ASCII
  markup into the desired HTML template.  But then, the few lines
  were awfully fragile about variations from the desired mold.  I
  got tracebacks for a few mistyped characters.  Oh my!  And
  wouldn't it be nice to use the wonderful [py2html] module to
  syntax-highlight the snippets of Python code I am writing
  *about*?  But just how can I be sure that a snippet is a
  snippet, and that it is in Python?

  Well now that I've made my script a little less fragile, and a
  bit more capable, maybe the code should be organized in a
  better fashion.  And good documentation is essential.  Hey, why
  not a form of *self*-documentation?

  Hmmm... this nicely documented, reasonably robust tool might be
  of use to some other people.  But how would they use it?  Well,
  most of the documents they are likely to want to prettify are
  probably out there at the end of a http:// or ftp:// somewhere
  in the world.  Wouldn't it be handy to have the tool run as a
  CGI (but still as a shell tool also)?  Still, even though a CGI
  is nice, as soon as you run it, you lose all the context of
  where you ran from.  It sure would be handy to have a little
  "navigation agent" that stayed around while you looked at
  different not-yet-pretty documents.

  And now that I think of it...

