(c) WestTech, 2002 -- may be freely distributed if unaltered

Spam Filtering Techniques:
Comparing a Half-Dozen Approaches to Eliminating Unwanted Email

David Mertz, Ph.D.
Noise Reducer, Gnosis Software, Inc.
August 2002

    The problem of unsolicited email has continued to increase
    every month for years.  Unethical senders bear little or no
    cost for mass distribution of messages, but normal email
    users are forced to spend time and effort purging fradulent
    and otherwise unwanted mail from our mailboxes.  This article
    discusses and compares several broad approaches to the
    automatic elimination of unwanted email; some specific
    popular tools following these approaches are mentioned and
    tested.


INTRODUCTION
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This article is incomplete in a special sense.  I will only
  write about ways that computer code can help eliminate
  unsolicited commercial email (UCE); computer viruses, trojans,
  and worms; frauds perpetrated electronically; and other
  undesired and troublesome email.  But in some sense, the final
  and best solution will probably involve elements of -legal
  code- as well.  However, a discussion of law is outside the
  scope of this article and of the developerWorks website.

  Considering matters technically--but also with common
  sense--what is generally called "SPAM" email is somewhat
  broader than the category -unsolicited commercial email-;
  basically it encompasses all the email that we do not want, and
  that is only very loosely directed at us.  Such messages are
  not always commercial per se, and some stretch the outer limits
  of what it means to be solicited.  For example, we do not want
  to get viruses (even from our unwary friends); nor do we
  generally want chain letters, even if they don't ask for money;
  nor proselytizing messages from strangers; nor outright
  attempts to defraud us.  In any case, it is usually not very
  ambiguous whether a message is spam, and many, many people get
  the same such emails.

  The problem with spam is that it tends to swamp desirable
  email.  In my own experience, a few years ago I occassionally
  received an inappropriate message or two during a day.  Every
  day of this month, I received -many times- more spams than I
  did legitimate correspondences.  On average, I probably get 10
  spams for every appropriate email.  In some ways I am
  unusual--as a public writer, I feel I need to maintain a widely
  published email address; moreover, I both welcome and receive
  numerous correspondences from strangers related to my published
  writing and to my software libraries.  Unfortunately, a letter
  from a stranger--with who-knows-which email application, OS,
  native natural language, and so on, is not -immediately-
  obvious in its purpose; and spammers try to slip their messages
  underneath such ambiguities.  My seconds are valuable to me,
  especially when they are claimed many times during every hour
  of a day.


Hiding contact information
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  For some email users, a reasonable, sufficient and very simple
  approach to avoiding spam is simply to remain reticent with
  email addresses.  For these people, an email address is
  something to be guarded, and revealed only to selected, trusted
  parties.  As extra precautions, email address can be chosen to
  avoid easily guessed names and dictionary words, and addresses
  can be disguised when posting to public fora.  We have all seen
  email addresses cutely encoded in forms like
  "<mertzHIDDEN@NOSPAM.gnosis.cx>" or "echo zregm@tabfvf.pk | tr
  A-Za-z N-ZA-Mn-za-m".

  In addition to hiding addresses, a secretive emailer often uses
  one or more of the free email services for -throwaway-
  addresses.  If you need to transact email with a semi-trusted
  party, a temporary address can be used for a few days, then
  abandoned along with any spam it might thereafter accumulate.
  The -real- "confidantes only" address is kept protected.

  I have found in my informal survey of discussions of spam on
  web-boards, mailing lists, the Usenet, and so on, that a
  category of email users gains sufficient protection from these
  basic precautions.

  However, for me--and for many other people--this approach is
  simply not possible.  I have a publicly available email
  address, and have good reasons why it needs to remain so.  I
  -do- utilize a variety of addresses within the domain I control
  to detect the source of spam leaks; but the unfortunate truth
  is that most spammers get my email address the same way my
  legitimate correspondents do: from the listing at the top of
  articles like this, and other public disclosures of my address.


FILTERING SOFTWARE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  This article looks at filtering software from a particular
  perspective.  I want to know how well different approaches work
  in correctly identifying spam as spam, and desirable messages
  as legitimate.  For purposes of answering this question, I am
  not particularly interested in the details of configuring
  filter applications to work with various Mail Transfer Agents
  (MTAs).  There is certainly a great deal of aracana surrounding
  the best configuration of MTAs like Sendmail, QMail, Procmail,
  Fetchmail, and others.  As well, many email clients have their
  own filtering options and/or plug-in APIs.  Fortunately, most
  of the filters I look at come with pretty good documentation
  covering configuring them with various MTAs.

  For purposes of my testing, I developed two corpora of
  messages:  spam and legitimate.  These corpora were both taken
  from mail I myself actually received.  Most of the messages
  used were received in the last couple months, but I added a
  significant subset of messages up to several years old to
  broaden the test.  I cannot know exactly what will be contained
  in next month's emails, so the past provides the best facsimile
  to the future's novelty.  That sounds cryptic, but all I mean
  is that I do not want to limit the patterns to a few words,
  phrases, regular expressions, etc. that might characterize the
  very latest emails, but that fail to generalize to the two
  types.

  In addition to the corpora, I developed training message sets
  for those tools that -learn- about spam and non-spam messages.
  The training sets are both larger and partially disjoint from
  the testing corpora.  The testing corpora consist of slightly
  fewer than 2000 spam messages, and about the same number of
  good messages.  The training sets are about twice as large.

  A general comment on testing is worth emphasizing.  False
  negatives in spam filters just mean that some unwanted messages
  make it to your inbox.  Not a good thing, but not horrible in
  itself.  False positives are cases where legitimate messages
  are misidentified as spam.  These can potentially be -very-
  bad, some legitimate messages are important, even urgent, in
  nature; and even those messages that are merely conversational
  are ones we do not want to lose.  Most filtering software
  allows you to save rejected messages in temporary folders
  pending review--but if you need to review a folder of spam, the
  usefulness of the software is thereby reduced.

Basic structured text filters
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The email client I use has the capability to sort incoming
  email based on simple strings found in specific header fields,
  the header in general, and/or in the body.  Its capability is
  very simple, and does not even include regular expression
  matching.  Almost all email clients have this much filtering
  capability.

  Over the last few months, I have developed a fairly small
  number of text filters.  These few simple filters correctly
  catch about 80% of the spam I receive.  Unfortunately, they
  also have a relatively high false positive rate--enough that I
  need to manually examine -some- of the spam folders from time to
  time (I sort probable spam into several different folders; and
  save them all to develop message corpora).  Although exact
  details will differ between users, a general pattern can be
  useful to most readers:

  SET 1:
  A few people or mailing lists that do funny things with their
  headers that get them flagged on other rules.  I catch
  something in the header (usually the From:) and whitelist it
  (either to INBOX or somewhere else).

  SET 2:
  In no particular order, I run the following spam filters:

  - Identify a specific bad sender
  - Look for "<>" as the From: header
  - Look for "@<" in the header (lots of spam has this for some
    reason)
  - Look for "Content-Type:  audio".  Nothing I want has
    this, only virii (YMMV).
  - Look for "euc-kr" and "ks_c_5601-1987" in the headers.  I
    can't read that language, but for some reason I get a *huge*
    volume of Korean spam (of course, for an actual readers of
    Korean, this is not a good rule).

  SET 3:
  Store messages to known legitimate addresses.  I have several
  such rules, but they all just match a literal To: field.

  SET 4:
  Look for messages that have a legit address in the -header-,
  but that wasn't caught by the previous To:  filters.  I find
  that when I am only in the Bcc:  field, it's almost always an
  unsolicited mailing to a list of alphabetically sequential
  addresses (mertz1@..., mertz37@..., etc).

  SET 5:
  Anything left at this point is probably spam (it probably has
  forged headers to avoid identification of the sender).


Whitelist/verification filters
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  An fairly aggressive technique for spam filtering is what I
  would call -whitelist plus automated verification- approach.
  There are several tools that implement a whitelist with
  verification: TDMA is a popular multi-platform open source
  tool; ChoiceMail is a commercial tool for Windows; most others
  seem more preliminary.

  A whitelist filter connects to an MTA, and only passes mail
  from explicitly approved recipients on to the inbox.  Other
  messages generate a special challenge response to the sender.
  The whitelist filter's response contains some kind of unique
  code that identifies the original message, such as a hash or
  sequential ID.  This challenge message contains instructions
  for the sender to reply in order to be added to the whitelist
  (the response message must contain the code generated by the
  whitelist filter).  Almost all spam messages contain forged
  return address information, so the challenge usually does not
  even arrives anywhere; but even those spammers who provide
  usable return addresses are unlikely to respond to a challenge.
  When a legitimate sender answers a challenge, her/his address
  is added to the whitelist so that any future messages from the
  same address are passed through automatically.

  Although I have not used any of these tools more than
  experimentally myself, I would expect whitelist/verification
  filters to be very nearly 100% effective in blocking spam
  messages.  It is conceivable that spammers will start adding
  challenge responses to their systems, but this could be
  countered by making challenges slightly more sophisticated
  (e.g. requiring small human modification to a code).  Spammers
  who respond, moreover, make themselves more easily traceable
  for people seeking legal remedies against them.

  The problem with whitelist/verification filters is the extra
  burden they place on legitimate senders.  Inasmuch as some
  correspondents may fail to respond to challenges--for any
  reason--this makes for a type of false positive.  In the best
  case, a slight extra effort is required for legitimate senders.
  But senders who have unreliable ISPs, picky firewalls, multiple
  email addresses, non-native understanding of English (or
  whatever language the challenge is written in), or who simply
  overlook or cannot be bothered with challenges, may not have
  their legitimate messages delivered.  Moreover, sometimes
  legitimate "correspondents" are not people at all, but
  automated response systems with no capability of challenge
  response.  Whitelist/verification filters are likely to require
  extra efforts to deal with mailing-list signups, online
  purchases, website registrations, and other "robot
  correspondences."


Distributed adaptive blacklists
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Spam is almost by definition delivered to a large number of
  recipients.  And as a matter of practice, there is little if
  any customization of spam messages to individual recipients.
  Each recipient of a spam, however, absent prior filtering must
  press her own "delete" button to get rid of the message.
  Distributed blacklists are ways to let one user's delete button
  warn millions of other users as to the spamminess of the
  message.

  Tools like Razor and Pyzor operate around servers that store
  digests of known spams.  When a message is received by a MTA, a
  distributed blacklist filter is called to determine whether the
  message is a known spam.  These tools use clever statistical
  techniques for creating digests, so that spams with minor or
  automated mutations (or just different headers resulting from
  transport routes) do not prevent recognition of message
  identity.  In addition, maintainers of distributed blacklist
  servers frequently create "honey-pot" addresses that are
  created specifically for the purpose of attracting spam (but
  never for any legitimate correspondences).

  In my testing, I found *zero* false positive spam
  categorizations by Pyzor.  I would not expect any to occur
  using other similar tools, like Razor.  There is some common
  sense to this.  Even if someone were ill-intentioned in trying
  to taint legitimate messages, she would not have samples of
  -my- good messages to report to the servers--it is generally
  only the spam messages that are widely distributed.  It is
  -conceivable- that a widely sent but legitimate message such
  as the developerWorks newsletter could be misreported, but the
  maintainers of distributed blacklist servers would almost
  certainly detect this and quickly correct such problems.

  As the below chart shows, however, false negatives are far more
  common using distributed blacklists than with any of the other
  techniques I tested.  The authors of Pyzor recommend using the
  tool in -conjunction- with other techniques rather than as a
  lone filter.  While this seems reasonable, it is not clear that
  such combined filtering will actually produce many more spam
  identifications than the other techniques by themselves.

  In addition, since distributed blacklists require talking to a
  server to perform verification, Pyzor performed far more
  slowly against my test corpora than did any other techniques.
  For testing a trickle of messages this is no big deal, for a
  high-volume ISP, it could be a problem.  I also found that I
  consistently experienced a couple network timeouts for each
  thousand queries, so my results have a handful of "errors" in
  place of "spam" or "good" identifications.


Rule based rankings
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  The most popular tool for rule based spam filtering, by a good
  margin, is -SpamAssassin-.  There are other tools, but they are
  not as widely used or actively maintained.  SpamAssassin (and
  similar tools) evaluate a large number of patterns--mostly
  regular expressions--against a candidate message.  Some matched
  patterns add to a message's score, while others subtract from
  it.  If a message's score exceeds a certain threshold, it is
  filtered as spam; otherwise it is considered legitimate.

  Some ranking rules are fairly constant over time--forged
  headers and auto-executing JavaScript, for example, almost
  timelessly mark spam.  Other rules need to be updated as the
  products and scams advanced by spammers evolves.  Herbal
  Viagra and heirs of African dictators might be the rage today,
  but tomorrow they might be edged out by some brand new
  snake-oil drug or pornographic theme.  As spam evolves,
  SpamAssassin must evolve to keep up with it.

  The README for SpamAssassin makes some very strong claims:

    In its most recent test, SpamAssassin differentiated between
    spam and non-spam mail correctly in 99.94% of cases.  Since
    then, it's just been getting better and better!

  My testing showed nowhere near this level of success.  Against
  my corpora, SpamAssassin had about 0.3% false positives and a
  whopping 19% false negatives.  In fairness, this only evaluated
  the rule based filters, not the optional checks against
  distributed blacklists.  Additionally, my spam corpus is not
  purely spam--it also includes a large collection of what are
  probably virus attachments (I do not open them to check for
  sure, but I know they are not messages I authorized).
  SpamAssassin's FAQ disclaims responsibility for finding
  viruses; on the other hand, the below techniques do much better
  in finding them, so the disclaimer is not all that compelling.

  SpamAssassin runs much quicker than distributed blacklists
  which need to query network servers.  But it also runs much
  slower than even non-optimized versions of the below
  statistical models (written in interpreted Python using naive
  data structures).


Baysian word distribution filters
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Paul Graham wrote a provocative essay this August 2002.  In "A
  Plan for Spam," Graham suggested building Baysian probability
  models of spam and non-spam words.  Graham's essay, or any
  general text on statistics and probability, can provide more
  mathematical background than I will here.

  The general idea here is that some words occur more frequently
  in known spam and other words occur more frequently in
  legitimate messages.  Using well-known mathematics, it is
  possible to generate a "spam-indicative probability" for each
  word.  Another simple mathematical formula can be used to
  determine the overall "spam probability" of a novel message,
  based on the collection of words it contains.

  Graham's idea has several noteworthy benefits:

  (1) It can generate a filter automatically from corpora of
  categorized messages rather than requiring human effort in rule
  development;

  (2) It can be customized to individual users' characteristic
  spam and legitimate messages;

  (3) It can be implemented in a very small number of lines of
  code;

  (4) It works surprisingly well.

  At first brush, it would be reasonable to suppose that a set of
  hand-tuned and laboriously developed rules like those in
  SpamAssassin would predict spam more accurately than a
  scattershod automated approach.  It turns out that this
  supposition is dead wrong.  A statistical model basically just
  works better than a rule based approach.  As a side benefit, a
  Graham-style Bayesian filter is also simpler and faster than
  SpamAssassin.

  Within days--perhaps hours--of Graham's article being
  published, many people simulataneously started working on
  implementing the system.  For purposes of my testing, I used a
  Python implementation created by a correspondent of mine named
  John Barham.  I thank him for providing his implementation.
  However, the mathematics are simple enough that every other
  implementation is largely equivalent.

  There are some issues of data structures and storage techniques
  that will effect operating speed of different tools.  But the
  actual predictive accuracy depends on very few factors--the
  main significant factor is probably the word-lexing technique
  used, and this matters mostly for eliminating spurious random
  strings.  Barham's implementation simply looks for relatively
  short, disjoint sequences of characters from a small set
  (alphanumeric plus a few others).


Baysian trigram filters
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Bayesian techniques built on a word model work rather well.
  One disadvantage the word model has is that the number of
  "words" one encounters in email is virtually unbounded.  This
  fact may be counterintuitive--it seems reasonable to suppose
  that you would reach an asymptote once almost all the English
  words had been included.  From my prior research into full text
  indexing I know that this is simply not true--the number of
  "word-like" character sequences one encounters is nearly
  unlimited, and new texts keep producing new sequences.  This
  fact is particularly true of emails, which contain random
  strings in Message-ID's, content separators, UU and base64
  encodings, and so on.  There are various ways to throw out
  words from the model--the easiest is just to discard the
  sufficiently infrequent ones.

  I decided to look into how well a much more starkly limited
  model space would work for a Baysian spam filter.
  Specifically, I decided to use trigrams for my probability
  model rather than "words."  This idea was not invented whole
  cloth, of course; there is a variety of research into language
  recognition/differentiation, cryptographic unicity distances of
  English, pattern frequencies, and related areas, that strongly
  suggest trigrams are a good unit.

  There were several decisions I made along the way.  The biggest
  choice was deciding what a trigram is.  While this is somewhat
  simpler than identifying a "word," the completely naive
  approach of looking at every (overlapping) sequence of three
  bytes is non-optimal.  In particular, considering high-bit
  characters--although occurring relatively frequently in
  multi-byte character sets (i.e.  CJK)--forces a much bigger
  trigram space on us than does looking only at the ASCII range.
  Limiting the trigram space even further than to low-bit
  characters produces a smaller space, but not better overall
  results.

  For my trigram analysis, I utilized only the most highly
  differentiating trigrams as message categorizers.  But I
  arrived at the chosen numbers of "spam" and "good" trigrams
  only by trial and error.  I also picked the cutoff probability
  for spam rather arbitrarily:  I made an interesting discover
  that no message in the "good" corpus was assigned a spam
  probability above .0071, other than two false positives in the
  .99 range.  Lowering my cutoff from an initial 0.9 to 0.1,
  however, allowed me to catch a few more message in the "spam"
  corpus.  For purposes of speed, I select no more than 100
  "interesting" trigrams from each candidate message--changing
  that 100 to something else can produce slight variations in the
  results (but not in an obvious direction).


Summary and Chart
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Given the testing methodology described earlier, let us look at
  the concrete testing results.  While I do not present any
  quantitative data on it, the chart is arranged in order of
  speed, from fastest to slowest.  Trigrams are fast, Pyzor
  (network lookup) is slow.  In evaluating techniques, as I
  stated, I consider false positives very bad, and false
  negatives only slightly bad.


                         Good Corpus         Spam Corpus

      "The Truth"         1851 / 0              0 / 1916

      Trigram Model       1849 / 2            142 / 1774

      Word Model          1847 / 4             97 / 1819

      SpamAssassin        1846 / 5            358 / 1558

      Pyzor               1847 / 0 (4 err)    971 / 943 (2 err)



RESOURCES
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  Lawrence Lessig has written a number of books and articles that
  particularly insightfully contrast what he metonymically calls
  "west-coast code" and "east-coast code"--i.e. the laws passed
  in Washington D.C. (and elsewhere) versus the software written
  in Silicon Valley (and elsewhere).  I wrote a short review of
  Lessig's _Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace_ at:

    http://gnosis.cx/publish/reviews/lessig_review_rpr

  Lessig has his own website, of course.  It provides a lot to
  think about:

    http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/lessig/

  Tagged Message Delivery Agent (TMDA):

    http://tmda.net/

  DigitalPortal Software's ChoiceMail:

    http://www.digiportal.com/product4.html

  Pyzor is a Python-based distributed spam catalog/filter.
  Information is at:

    http://pyzor.sourceforge.net/

  Vipul's Razor is a very popular distributed spam
  catalog/filter.  Razor is optionally called by a number of
  other filter tools, such as SpamAssassin.  Information on Razor
  is at:

    http://razor.sourceforge.net/

  SpamAssassin is the most popular rule based spam filter.  It
  lives at:

    http://spamassassin.taint.org/

  Paul Graham's essay "A Plan for Spam" can be read at:

    http://www.paulgraham.com/spam.html

  Eric Raymond has created a fast implementation of Paul Graham's
  idea under the name "bogofilter." As well as using some
  efficient data representation and storage strategies,
  bogofiliter tries to be smart about identifying what makes a
  meaningful word:

    http://www.tuxedo.org/~esr/bogofilter/

  My own trigram-based categorization tools are still at an early
  alpha or prototype level.  However, you are welcome to use them
  as a basis for development.  They are public domain, like all
  the tools I write for developerWorks articles:

    http://gnosis.cx/download/trigram-tools.zip


ABOUT THE AUTHOR
------------------------------------------------------------------------

  {Picture of Author:  http://gnosis.cx/cgi-bin/img_dqm.cgi}
  David Mertz dislikes spam.  He wishes to thank Andrew Blais for
  assistance in this article's testing, as well as for listening
  to David's peculiar fascination with trigrams and their
  distributions.  David may be reached at mertz@gnosis.cx; his
  life pored over at http://gnosis.cx/publish/.  Suggestions and
  recommendations on this, past, or future, columns are welcomed.



